#summary One-sentence summary of this page.
#labels Documentation

= Introduction =

cm-interface is a software API for the Command Module for iRobot's Create.

= Software requirements =

As this is only source code, a cross-compiler is required to compile and download it to the Command Module.

Under Windows, the software that comes with the Command Module is sufficient.

Under Linux, you need to install the following packages:
  * avrdude (for downloading the code to the device)
  * gcc-avr (for compiling)

I'm not sure what software you'd need to compile it under MacOS.

= Using this library =

To use this library, add the files "cm-interface.c" and "oi.h" to your project, and add the following _#include_ line to the top of your source code:
#include "cm-interface.c"

During your program's initialization, it is imperative that you call cm_init() before trying to use any other functions, as it sets up the communication channel between you and the robot.

When your code is ready to start using the robot, it is recommended that you turn it on with a call to cm_power_on() (to ensure the robot is, in fact, on) and then cm_start().
(it is also recommended to slow the communication channel down to a baud rate of 28800 bits per second so no data is lost)

After that, you can ask for all sensor data to be updated with a call to cm_update_sensors(), or a specific on with cm_update_sensor(sensor_code), or you can tell the robot to move around with the cm_drive(speed, radius) or cm_direct_drive(right_speed, left_speed) functions.

Most of the functions in this library are based on the Open Interface documentation, so for full reference of the commands, please read that document available here:
[http://www.irobot.com/filelibrary/pdfs/hrd/create/Create%20Open%20Interface_v2.pdf Create Open Interface reference]

Complete reference information will be available at a later date.